Do you sometimes feel completely overwhelmed
when life’s problems cause you anxiety?
Just trying to provide the necessities
for one’s family can lead to anxiety.
At the same time,
you might be dealing
with a chronic or life-threatening illness,
caring for a sick or elderly relative,
grieving the death of a loved one,
loneliness, a natural disaster,
or maybe you’re struggling
with the devastating effects
of past or present abuse.
Now, you firmly believe
that God’s Kingdom will fix these problems,
but that’s in the future.
What about today?
Perhaps you feel like David,
who prayed at Psalm 13:2:
“How long will I have anxious concern,
with grief in my heart each day?”
A sister who has struggled
with anxiety for many years wrote this:
“Anxiety robs me of sleep,
impacts my health,
affects the way I treat others,
and makes me want to give up.”
She added: “Anxiety is like a monster
“that lives in my body
somewhere between my heart and my belly.
“I cannot wait for Jehovah
to kill that monster in the new world.
“But until then,
the monster snarls and tears at my insides
and tries to take over my life.”
Can you identify with her feelings?
We often hear a person say concerning anxiety:
“I’m just trying to take it one day at a time.”
But one brother put it this way:
“I try to take it one day at a time,
but sometimes several days attack me at once.”
For so many of us, anxiety is a daily struggle.
If you battle with anxiety,
please know this: You are not alone.
Do not give up the fight.
Jehovah and Jesus are aware of the anxieties
that weigh on your mind
and that are deep in your heart.
The Governing Body
knows that living in this system of things
is especially “hard to deal with.”
So the theme chosen for this program is
“Deal With Anxiety One Day at a Time.”
First, what is anxiety?
In the Christian Greek Scriptures,
the word “anxious” occurs 19 times.
The first occurrence
is in Jesus’ Sermon on the Mount.
Now, Jesus knew that people
worried about how to provide for their family.
So at Matthew 6:25,
he gave this wise counsel:
“On this account I say to you:
“Stop being anxious about your lives
“as to what you will eat or what you will drink,
“or about your bodies as to what you will wear.
“Does not life mean more than food
and the body than clothing?”
The Study Bible note for verse 25
says that “the Greek term for ‘anxious’
“can refer to worry that divides a person’s mind
and distracts him, robbing him of joy.”
At Luke 12:29,
Jesus says to “stop being in anxious suspense”
or to “stop worrying.”
The study note here says
that the Greek word
for “anxious suspense” was used
to refer “to ships being tossed at sea.”
It says that Jesus used it “figuratively
“for being anxious or unsettled,
“as if tossed about or wavering
because of doubt and anxiety.”
By saying “stop being anxious,”
Jesus recognizes
that anxiety is already in progress.
He is very aware of our imperfect nature.
He knows that we tend
to bring our worries from yesterday
(the would-haves,
could-haves, and should-haves)
and our imagined worries about tomorrow
(the what-ifs) to today.
But ask yourself,
‘How often have I worried myself
sick about what might happen tomorrow,
only to find that tomorrow
wasn’t nearly as bad as I feared it would be?’
Jesus also knows that anxiety can have real,
sometimes painful, consequences.
It can stop us from making spiritual progress.
Overthinking and overanalyzing our problems
can literally shut us down.
How, though, can we “stop being anxious”?
What’s the antidote?
Let’s consider four practical things we can do.
First, rely on Jehovah
and take one day at a time.
This is exactly what Jesus prescribed for us
at Matthew 6:33, 34:
“Keep on, then, seeking first the Kingdom
“and his righteousness,
“and all these other things will be added to you.
“So never be anxious about the next day,
“for the next day will have its own anxieties.
Each day has enough of its own troubles.”
Verse 34 has a study note
telling us that “undue anxiety
about what may happen in the future
“can adversely affect
a person’s relationship with God,
causing him to rely
on his own wisdom rather than on God’s.”
So, what’s the lesson?
Instead of relying on ourselves,
rely on Jehovah, and take one day at a time.
A cross-reference to Matthew 6:34
takes us to Exodus 16:4.
In this account,
Jehovah provided
the Israelites with enough manna
for every day of their 40-year trek.
Could Jehovah have provided
a week’s worth of manna?
a month’s worth? a year’s worth?
Of course.
So why did
he only provide enough for each day?
Well, think about it.
When they stepped out
of their tents each morning,
there was no question whether
there would be manna on the ground or not,
and there was
no question where it came from.
Jehovah never failed to provide for their needs,
not even for one day.
They also knew from the past that Jehovah
always provided for those who were loyal to him.
We too can look back
at how Jehovah provided for his servants.
We can have
complete confidence that Jehovah knows exactly
what we need when we need it
—for today, tomorrow, and for all eternity.
Even if we have such confidence,
why do we sometimes continue to feel anxious?
The simple answer:
We’re imperfect people trying our best
to serve Jehovah in Satan’s wicked world.
Daily challenges cause anxiety
that can make us forget to rely on Jehovah
and take one day at a time.
So we need to add
our second way to deal with anxiety:
Pour your heart out
to Jehovah in earnest prayer.
Read with me the reassuring words
at Philippians 4:6, 7:
“Do not be anxious over anything,
“but in everything by prayer
“and supplication along with thanksgiving,
“let your petitions be made known to God;
“and the peace of God that surpasses
“all understanding will guard your hearts
and your mental powers by means of Christ Jesus.”
Paul doesn’t simply tell us not to be anxious,
but he tells us how.
He said “by prayer and supplication,”
which is earnest and specific prayer.
With what benefit?
The “peace of God . . . will guard your hearts.”
“Guard” was a military expression referring to troops
assigned to protect a city.
The inhabitants could sleep soundly
knowing that soldiers were guarding them at night.
In a similar way,
when we have “the peace of God,”
our hearts and minds can rest.
This can prevent us from being
overwhelmed by anxiety or discouragement.
How reassuring are the words of the psalmist
at Psalm 4:8:
“I will lie down and sleep in peace,
“for you alone, O Jehovah,
make me dwell in security.”
So when we feel trapped,
like there’s no way out of our worries,
the peace from God gives us hope
that there’s light at the end of the tunnel.
What, though, must you do?
Turn your worries into deep, heartfelt prayers.
In fact, at 1 Peter 5:7,
Jehovah invites you
to “throw all your anxiety on him,
“[and leave it with him]
because he cares for you.”
Jehovah is the one person
who truly understands how you feel.
He knows every moment of your life
—why you feel or react a certain way.
He loves and values you personally
despite your imperfections, your anxieties,
your cares and worries.
He not only has
the power to help you, he wants to.
Knowing this
should move you to pray specifically,
expressing your deepest emotions
and pleading
that he grant you peace of mind and heart.
To the extent you do so,
1 Peter 5:10 promises
that “he will make you firm,
“he will make you strong,
he will firmly ground you.”
Never underestimate the power of prayer!
Jehovah is always ready to help you
—one day at a time.
Our third way to deal with anxiety
is to read and meditate on God’s Word.
Let Jehovah speak to you.
Allow Jehovah’s thoughts to become your thoughts.
At Psalm 94:19,
notice how the psalmist admitted his own anxiety:
“When anxieties overwhelmed me,
you comforted and soothed me.”
Yes, even servants of God
can feel overwhelmed by anxieties
or, as one translation says,
“burdened with worries.”
That in itself is comforting
that an inspired Bible writer
struggled with anxieties.
But Jehovah “comforted and soothed” him,
calming his troubled heart.
God can do the same for us
through his inspired Word, the Bible.
Remember,
the Bible is how Jehovah speaks to us.
Rather than allowing our emotions to run wild,
we can learn to focus
our mind on upbuilding things,
such as what
the apostle Paul listed at Philippians 4:8:
“Finally, brothers, whatever things are true,
“whatever things are of serious concern,
“whatever things are righteous,
“whatever things are chaste,
“whatever things are lovable,
“whatever things are well-spoken-of,
“whatever things are virtuous,
“and whatever things are praiseworthy,
continue considering these things.”
The footnote to verse 8 shows that “considering”
involves “thinking about” or “meditating on.”
We can and should
meditate on positive things from the Bible,
replacing negative things
that may enter our mind and cause anxiety.
Ask Jehovah to help you to find passages
in his Word that will soothe your heart.
Ask others what scriptures have calmed
their heart during anxious moments.
Make your own personal list.
Then set aside time to read
and meditate on those passages.
Meditation is the doorway to your heart.
Meditation lets God’s thoughts affect you
on the deepest possible level.
Imagine that Jehovah is speaking directly to you,
because he is.
Never underestimate the power of God’s Word
—of letting Jehovah speak to you.
Our fourth way to deal with anxiety
is to share your feelings with a trusted friend.
Proverbs 12:25 says:
“Anxiety in a man’s heart weighs it down
“[or, as the footnote says, ‘depresses him’],
but a good word cheers it up.”
“A good word” can come from a fellow believer
who is motivated
by God’s spirit and guided by his Word.
When the apostle Paul was alone in prison,
he prayed for encouragement
and Jehovah provided
what he needed to cheer him up.
With a heart full of appreciation,
he said at Colossians 4:11
that “my fellow workers  . . . have become
a source of great comfort to me,”
or “a strengthening aid.”
What can you do if you feel
weighed down or imprisoned by anxiety?
Like Paul, pray for encouragement.
Pray for someone you can talk to,
someone you can trust with your feelings.
The answer to your prayer may be an elder
or a mature Christian brother or sister.
But what if it’s difficult for you
to open up to others and confide in them?
Try the advice
in the March 1, 1997, Watchtower article
“Are You Afraid to Trust Others?”
When confiding in someone
it says: “Reveal your concerns gradually.
“If he [or she] responds in an appropriate,
“sympathetic, and discreet way,
you might then try disclosing more.”
Even if it takes some effort,
never underestimate the power of our brotherhood.
Jehovah can use a fellow worshipper
to ease your mind of “anxious concern.”
Even at times when there’s no one to talk to,
we can let the experiences,
upbuilding music,
and talks on JW Broadcasting® be like
an encouraging hug from a trusted friend.
Yes, when we make the effort,
we give Jehovah something to bless.
Jehovah can help us
conquer the seemingly unconquerable.
That may not mean
that we’ll completely eliminate anxiety,
but we can learn to take control.
How?
Remember our four ways:
First, rely on Jehovah
and take one day at time;
second, pour out your heart
to Jehovah in earnest, specific prayer;
third, read and meditate on God’s Word
—let Jehovah speak to you;
and fourth, share your feelings with a trusted friend.
With Jehovah’s help,
you can deal with anxiety one day at a time.